documentation/IDTA-01001/modules/ROOT/pages/spec-metamodel/datatypes.adoc, before:

////
Copyright (c) 2023 Industrial Digital Twin Association

This work is licensed under a [Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License](
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). 

SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-4.0

////

= Primitive and Simple Data Types

== Predefined Simple Data Types

The metamodel of the Asset Administration Shell uses some of the predefined simple data types of the  XML Schema Definition (XSD) as its basic data types.
See <<table-simple-data-types>> for an overview of the used types.
Their definition is outside the scope of this document.

The meaning and format of xsd types is specified in XML Schema 1.0 (https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2).
The simple type "langString" is specified in the Resource Description Framework (RDF) footnote:[see: https://www.w3.org/TR/rdf11-concepts/].

See  xref:spec-metamodel/constraints.adoc#constraints-for-types[Constraints for Types] for constraints on types.

.Simple Data Types Used in Metamodel
[[table-simple-data-types]]
[cols="10%,19%,38%,33%",options="header",]
|===
|Source |Basic Data Type |Value Range |Sample Values

|xsd |https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#string[string] a|Character string (but not all Unicode character strings) |"Hello world", "Καλημέρα κόσμε", +
"ハローワールド""

|xsd |https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#base64Binary[base64Binary] |base64-encoded binary data a|
[listing]
....
SGVsbG8sIFdvcmxkIQ==   
....

|xsd |https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#boolean[boolean] a|true, false |true, false


|xsd |https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#dateTime[dateTime] |Date and time with or without time zone a|"2000-01-01T14:23:00", +
"2000-01-01T14:23:00.66372+14:00"footnote:[Corresponds to https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#dateTime[xs:dateTime] in XML Schema 1.0]

|xsd |https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#duration[duration] |Duration of time a|"-P1Y2M3DT1H", +
"PT1H5M0S"

|rdf |langString |Strings with language tags a|
"Hello"@en, +
"Hallo"@de


====
Note: this is written in RDF/Turtle syntax, only "Hello" and "Hallo" are the actual values.
====


|===


[[primitive-data-types]]
== Primitive Data Types

<<table-primitive-data-types>> lists the Primitives used in the metamodel.
Primitive data types start with a capital letter.

====
Note: see  xref:spec-metamodel/constraints.adoc#constraints-for-types[Constraints for Types] for constraints on types.
====

.Primitive Data Types Used in Metamodel
[[table-primitive-data-types]]
[cols="13%,30%,57%"]
|===

.2+h|Primitive 2+h| ID
h|Definition h|Value Examples

.2+e|[[BlobType]]BlobType 2+| `\https://admin-shell.io/aas/3/1/BlobType`
a|
_base64binary_

to represent file content (binaries and non-binaries)

a|
[listing]
....
SGVsbG8sIFdvcmxkIQ==   
....

for "Hello, World!"

.2+e|[[ContentType]]ContentType 2+| `admin-shell.io/aas/3/1/ContentType`
a|
_string_ with max 128 and min 1 characters

Any content type as specified in link:https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2046[RFC2046].

The content type should be registered by the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (link:https://www.iana.org/assignments/media-types/media-types.xhtml[IANA]) as specified in link:https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2048[RFC2048].



a|
application/pdf

image/jpeg

.2+e|[[DateTimeUtc]]DateTimeUtc 2+| `\https://admin-shell.io/aas/3/1/DateTimeUtc`
| _dateTime_ for UTC a|

    1997-07-16T19:20+01:00

	2025-02-24T12:31:14Z

.2+e|[[Identifier]]Identifier 2+| `\https://admin-shell.io/aas/3/1/Identifier`
|_string_ with max 2048 and min 1 characters a|
\https://cust/123456

0173-1#02-BAA120#008

.2+e|[[LabelType]]LabelType 2+| `\https://admin-shell.io/aas/3/1/LabelType`
a|_string_ with max 64 and min 1 characters a|"ABC1234"


.2+e|[[LangStringSet]]LangStringSet 2+| `\https://admin-shell.io/aas/3/1/LangStringSet`
a|
_Array of elements of type langString_


====
Note 1: langString is a RDF data type.
====



====
Note 2: a langString is a string value tagged with a language code.
====


Realization depends on the serialization rules for a technology.

a| Example for the attribute with name "description" of "Referable", i.e. of type "MultiLanguageTextType":
In xml:

[source,xml]
----
<description>
  <langStringTextType>
    <language>en</language>
	<text>This is a multi-language value in English</text>
  </langStringTextType>
  <langStringTextType>
    <language>de</language>
	<text>Das ist ein Multi-Language-Wert in Deutsch</text>
  </langStringTextType>
</description>
----

In rdf:
[source,rdf]
----
[] <https://admin-shell.io/aas/3/1/Referable/description> [
  rdf:type aas:LangStringTextType ;
  <https://admin-shell.io/aas/3/1/AbstractLangString/language> "en"^^xs:string ;
  <https://admin-shell.io/aas/3/1/AbstractLangString/text> "This is a multi-language value in English"^^xs:string ;
] ;
.
----

In JSON :

[source,json,linenums]
----
"description": [
   {
     "language":"en",
     "text": "This is a multi-language value in English."
   },
   {
     "language":"de",
     "text": "Das ist ein Multi-Language-Wert in Deutsch."
   }
]
----
.2+e|[[MessageTopicType]]MessageTopicType 2+| `\https://admin-shell.io/aas/3/1/MessageTopicType`
a|_string_ with max 255 and min 1 characters |

.2+e|[[MultiLanguageNameType]]MultiLanguageNameType 2+| `\https://admin-shell.io/aas/3/1/MultiLanguageNameType`
a| xref:LangStringSet[LangStringSet]

Each langString within the array of strings has a max 128 of and a min of 1 characters (as for NameType).

| See xref:LangStringSet[LangStringSet]

.2+e|[[MultiLanguageTextType]]MultiLanguageTextType 2+| `\https://admin-shell.io/3/1/MultiLanguageTextType`
a| xref:LangStringSet[LangStringSet]

Each string within langString has a max of 1,023 and min of 1 characters.

|See xref:LangStringSet[LangStringSet]

.2+e|[[NameType]]NameType 2+| `\https://admin-shell.io/aas/3/1/NameType`
a|_string_ with max 128 and min 1 characters |"ManufacturerPartId"



.2+e|[[PathType]]PathType 2+| `\https://admin-shell.io/aas/3/1/PathType`
a|

_string_
with max 2048 and min 1 characters

conformant to a URI as per https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#RFC2396[RFC 2396]

====
Note: Values with this restriction are also conformant to the xsd datatype https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#anyURI[anyURI].

"A wide range of internationalized resource identifiers can be specified when an anyURI is called for, and still be understood as URIs per https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#RFC2396[RFC 2396] and its successor(s)."

Source: https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#anyURI[W3C XML Schema Definition Language (XSD) 1.0 Part 2: Datatypes]
====


a|
{blank}./Specification.pdf

file:c:/local/Specification.pdf

\http://www.example.org

FTP://unicode.org


.2+e|[[QualifierType]]QualifierType 2+| `\https://admin-shell.io/aas/3/1/QualifierType`
a|_NameType_ a|
"ExpressionSemantic" (as specified in DIN DKE SPEC 92000:2019-09, see xref:bibliography.adoc#bib16[[16\]])

"life cycle qual" (as specified in IEC 61360-7 - IEC/SC 3D - Common Data Dictionary (link:https://cdd.iec.ch/cdd/common/iec61360-7.nsf/SearchFrameset?OpenFrameSet[CDD - V2.0015.0004])



.2+e|[[RevisionType]]RevisionType 2+| `\https://admin-shell.io/aas/3/1/RevisionType`
a|
_string_ with max 4 and min 1 characters
following the following regular expression:

`^([0-9]\|[1-9][0-9]*)$`

a|
"0"

"7"

"567"

.2+e|[[ValueDataType]]ValueDataType 2+| `\https://admin-shell.io/aas/3/1/ValueDataType`
a|_any xsd atomic type as specified via xref:DataTypeDefXsd[DataTypeDefXsd]_ a|
"This is a string value"

10

1.5

2020-04-01

True


.2+e|[[VersionType]]VersionType 2+| `\https://admin-shell.io/aas/3/1/VersionType`
a|
_string_ with max 4 and min 1 characters

following the following regular expression:

`^([0-9]\|[1-9][0-9]*)$`

a|
"1"

"9999"

|===

== Enumeration for Submodel Element Value Types

Enumerations are primitive data types.
Most of the enumerations are defined in the context of their class.
This clause defines enumerations for submodel element value typesfootnote:[E.g. Property/valueType].

The predefined types used to define the type of values of properties and other values use the names and the semantics of XML Schema Definition (XSD)footnote:[see https://www.w3.org/XML/Schema, https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#built-in-primitive-datatypes].
Additionally, the type "langString" with the semantics as defined in the Resource Description Framework (RDF)footnote:[see: https://www.w3.org/TR/rdf11-concepts/] is used. "langString" is a string value tagged with a language code.

====
Note 1: RDFfootnote:[See https://www.w3.org/TR/rdf11-concepts/#xsd-datatypes] uses XML Schema Built-in data types from Version 1.1 but recommends to use only a subset of xsd data types.
That is why they are excluded from the allowed data types in xref:DataTypeDefXsd[DataTypeDefXsd].


* XSD BuildIn List types are not supported (ENTITIES, IDREFS and NMTOKENS).
* XSD string BuildIn types are not supported (normalizedString, token, language, NCName, ENTITY, ID, IDREF).
* The following XSD primitive types are not supported: NOTATION, QName.
====

====
Note 2: additionally, the following RDF types are not supported in xref:DataTypeDefXsd[DataTypeDefXsd]: HTML and XMLLiteral.
====

.DefTypeDefRdf Enumeration
[plantuml, 53-data-type-def-rdf, svg]
....
include::partial$diagrams/53-data-type-def-rdf.puml[]
....

The enumeration is derived from <<image-55-xml-built-in-types>>.

.Data TypeDefXsd Enumeration
[plantuml, 54-data-type-def-xsd, svg]
....
include::partial$diagrams/54-data-type-def-xsd.puml[]
....


<<table-data-types-with-examples>> depicts example values and the value range of the different data types.

The left column "Data Type" shows the data types which can be used for submodel element values.
The data types are defined according to the W3C XML Schema (https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#built-in-datatypes and https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#built-in-derived).
"Value Range" further explains the possible range of data values for this data type.
The right column shows related examples for values of the corresponding data type.

.Data Types with Examples footnote:[See list of RDF-compatible XSD types with short description https://www.w3.org/TR/rdf11-concepts/#xsd-datatypes. Examples from https://openmanufacturingplatform.github.io/sds-bamm-aspect-meta-model/bamm-specification/v1.0.0/datatypes.html]
[[table-data-types-with-examples]]
[cols="15%,22%,24%,39%",options="header",]
|===
| |Data Type |Value Range |Sample Values
|Core types e|xs:string |Character string (but not all Unicode character strings) a|
"Hello world"

"Καλημέρα κόσμε"

"こんにちは世界"


| e|xs:boolean |true, false |true, false
| e|xs:decimal |Arbitrary-precision decimal numbers a|
-1.23

126789672374892739424.543233

+100000.00, 210

| e|xs:integer |Arbitrary-size integer numbers a|
-1

0

126789675432332938792837429837429837429

+100000

|IEEE floating-point numbers e|xs:double |64-bit floating point numbers incl. ±Inf, ±0, NaN a|
-1.0

+0.0

-0.0

234.567e8

-INF

NaN

| e|xs:float |32-bit floating point numbers incl. ±Inf, ±0, NaN a|
-1.0

+0.0

-0.0

234.567e8

-INF

NaN

|Time and dates e|xs:date |Dates (yyyy-mm-dd) with or without time zone a|
"2000-01-01"

"2000-01-01Z"

"2000-01-01+12:05"

| e|xs:time |Times (hh:mm:ss.sss…) with or without time zone a|
"14:23:00"

"14:23:00.527634Z"

"14:23:00+03:00"

| e|xs:dateTime |Date and time with or without time zone a|
"2000-01-01T14:23:00"

"2000-01-01T14:23:00.66372+14:00"footnote:[Corresponds to xs:dateTimeStamp in XML Schema 1.1]

|Recurring and partial dates |xs:gYear |Gregorian calendar year a|
"2000"

"2000+03:00"

| e|xs:gMonth |Gregorian calendar month a|
"--04"

"--04+03:00"

| e|xs:gDay |Gregorian calendar day of the month a|
"---04"

"---04+03:00"

| e|xs:gYearMonth |Gregorian calendar year and month a|
"2000-01"

"2000-01+03:00"

| e|xs:gMonthDay |Gregorian calendar month and day a|
"--01-01"

"--01-01+03:00"

| e|xs:duration |Duration of time a|
"P30D"

"-P1Y2M3DT1H", "PT1H5M0S"

|Limited-range integer numbers |xs:byte |-128…+127 (8 bit) a|
-1, 0

127

| e|xs:short |-32768…+32767 (16 bit) a|
-1, 0

32767

| e|xs:int |2147483648…+2147483647 (32 bit) a|
-1, 0

2147483647

| e|xs:long |-9223372036854775808…+9223372036854775807 (64 bit) a|
-1

0, 9223372036854775807

| e|xs:unsignedByte |0…255 (8 bit) a|
0

1

255

| e|xs:unsignedShort |0…65535 (16 bit) a|
0

1

65535

| e|xs:unsignedInt |0…4294967295 (32 bit) a|
0

1

4294967295

| e|xs:unsignedLong |0…18446744073709551615 (64 bit) a|
0

1

18446744073709551615

| e|xs:positiveInteger |Integer numbers >0 a|
1

7345683746578364857368475638745

| e|xs:nonNegativeInteger |Integer numbers ≥0 a|
0

1

734568374657836485736847563

| e|xs:negativeInteger |Integer numbers <0 a|
-1

-23487263847628376482736487263

| e|xs:nonPositiveInteger |Integer numbers ≤0 a|
-1

0

-938458374985739874987989873

|Encoded binary data e|xs:hexBinary |Hex-encoded binary data a|"6b756d6f77617368657265"

| e|xs:base64Binary |Base64-encoded binary data a|
[listing]
....
SGVsbG8sIFdvcmxkIQ==   
....

|Miscellaneous types e|xs:anyURI |Absolute or relative URIs and IRIs a|
\https://customer.com/demo/aas/1/1/1234859590

"urn:example:company:1.0.0"

| e|rdf:langString |Strings with language tags a|
"Hello"@en

"Hallo"@de


====
Note: this is written in RDF/Turtle syntax, @en and de are the language tags.
====


|===

[.table-with-appendix-table]
[cols="30%h,70%"]
|===
|Enumeration: |[[DataTypeDefXsd]]DataTypeDefXsd
|Explanation: a|
Enumeration listing selected xsd anySimpleTypes of XML Schema 1.0

For more details see https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#built-in-primitive-datatypes

|Set of: |--
h|ID: | `\https://admin-shell.io/aas/3/1/DataTypeDefXsd`

h|Literal h|Explanation
e|xs:anyURI |see: https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#anyURI
e|xs:base64Binary |see: https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#base64Binary
e|xs:boolean |see https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#boolean
e|xs:byte |see https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#byte
e|xs:date |see https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#date
e|xs:dateTime |see https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#dateTime
e|xs:decimal |see https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#decimal
e|xs:double |see https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#double
e|xs:duration |see https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#duration
e|xs:float |see https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#float
e|xs:gDay |see https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#gDay
e|xs:gMonth |see https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#gMonth
e|xs:gMonthDay |see https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#gMonthDay
e|xs:gYear |see https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#gYear
e|xs:gYearMonth |see https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#gYearMonth
e|xs:hexBinary |see https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#hexBinary
e|xs:int |see https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#int
e|xs:integer |see https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#integer
e|xs:long |see https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#long
e|xs:negativeInteger |see https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#negativeInteger
e|xs:nonNegativeInteger |see: https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#nonNegativeInteger
e|xs:nonPositiveInteger |see: https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#nonPositiveInteger
e|xs:positiveInteger |see: https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#positiveInteger
e|xs:short |see: https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#short
e|xs:string |see: https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#string
e|xs:time |see: https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#time
e|xs:unsignedByte |see: https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#unsignedShort
e|xs:unsignedInt |see: https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#unsignedInt
e|xs:unsignedLong |see: https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#unsignedLong
e|xs:unsignedShort |see: https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#unsignedShort
|===

[.table-with-appendix-table]
[cols="30%h,70%"]
|===
h|Enumeration: |[[DataTypeDefRdf]]DataTypeDefRdf
h|Explanation: |Enumeration listing all RDF types
|Set of: |--
h|ID: | `\https://admin-shell.io/aas/3/1/DataTypeDefRdf`

h|Literal h|Explanation
e|rdf:langString |String with a language tag
|===

RDF requires IETF BCP 47footnote:[see https://tools.ietf.org/rfc/bcp/bcp47.txt] language tags.
Simple two-letter language tags for locales like "de" conformant to ISO 639-1 are allowed, as well as language tags plus extension like "de-DE" for country code, dialect, etc. like in "en-US" for English (United States) or "en-GB" for English (United Kingdom).
IETF language tags are referencing ISO 639, ISO 3166 and ISO 15924.

.Built-In Types of XML Schema Definition 1.0 (XSD)footnote:[Source: https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#built-in-primitive-datatypes]

[[image-55-xml-built-in-types]]
image::55-xml-built-in-types.png[]

Commit message:

fix reverted merge into main from PR #621 XML Schema Data Types vs IEEE 754 Definitions for merging into V3.2 and not into main

documentation/IDTA-01001/modules/ROOT/pages/spec-metamodel/datatypes.adoc, after:

////
Copyright (c) 2023 Industrial Digital Twin Association

This work is licensed under a [Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License](
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). 

SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-4.0

////

= Primitive and Simple Data Types

== Predefined Simple Data Types

The metamodel of the Asset Administration Shell uses some of the predefined simple data types of the  XML Schema Definition (XSD) as its basic data types.
See <<table-simple-data-types>> for an overview of the used types.
Their definition is outside the scope of this document.

The meaning and format of xsd types is specified in XML Schema 1.0 (https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2).
The simple type "langString" is specified in the Resource Description Framework (RDF) footnote:[see: https://www.w3.org/TR/rdf11-concepts/].

See  xref:spec-metamodel/constraints.adoc#constraints-for-types[Constraints for Types] for constraints on types.

.Simple Data Types Used in Metamodel
[[table-simple-data-types]]
[cols="10%,19%,38%,33%",options="header",]
|===
|Source |Basic Data Type |Value Range |Sample Values

|xsd |https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#string[string] a|Character string (but not all Unicode character strings) |"Hello world", "Καλημέρα κόσμε", +
"ハローワールド""

|xsd |https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#base64Binary[base64Binary] |base64-encoded binary data a|
[listing]
....
SGVsbG8sIFdvcmxkIQ==   
....

|xsd |https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#boolean[boolean] a|true, false |true, false


|xsd |https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#dateTime[dateTime] |Date and time with or without time zone a|"2000-01-01T14:23:00", +
"2000-01-01T14:23:00.66372+14:00"footnote:[Corresponds to https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#dateTime[xs:dateTime] in XML Schema 1.0]

|xsd |https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#duration[duration] |Duration of time a|"-P1Y2M3DT1H", +
"PT1H5M0S"

|rdf |langString |Strings with language tags a|
"Hello"@en, +
"Hallo"@de


====
Note: this is written in RDF/Turtle syntax, only "Hello" and "Hallo" are the actual values.
====


|===


[[primitive-data-types]]
== Primitive Data Types

<<table-primitive-data-types>> lists the Primitives used in the metamodel.
Primitive data types start with a capital letter.

====
Note: see  xref:spec-metamodel/constraints.adoc#constraints-for-types[Constraints for Types] for constraints on types.
====

.Primitive Data Types Used in Metamodel
[[table-primitive-data-types]]
[cols="13%,30%,57%"]
|===

.2+h|Primitive 2+h| ID
h|Definition h|Value Examples

.2+e|[[BlobType]]BlobType 2+| `\https://admin-shell.io/aas/3/1/BlobType`
a|
_base64binary_

to represent file content (binaries and non-binaries)

a|
[listing]
....
SGVsbG8sIFdvcmxkIQ==   
....

for "Hello, World!"

.2+e|[[ContentType]]ContentType 2+| `admin-shell.io/aas/3/1/ContentType`
a|
_string_ with max 128 and min 1 characters

Any content type as specified in link:https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2046[RFC2046].

The content type should be registered by the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (link:https://www.iana.org/assignments/media-types/media-types.xhtml[IANA]) as specified in link:https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2048[RFC2048].



a|
application/pdf

image/jpeg

.2+e|[[DateTimeUtc]]DateTimeUtc 2+| `\https://admin-shell.io/aas/3/1/DateTimeUtc`
| _dateTime_ for UTC a|

    1997-07-16T19:20+01:00

	2025-02-24T12:31:14Z

.2+e|[[Identifier]]Identifier 2+| `\https://admin-shell.io/aas/3/1/Identifier`
|_string_ with max 2048 and min 1 characters a|
\https://cust/123456

0173-1#02-BAA120#008

.2+e|[[LabelType]]LabelType 2+| `\https://admin-shell.io/aas/3/1/LabelType`
a|_string_ with max 64 and min 1 characters a|"ABC1234"


.2+e|[[LangStringSet]]LangStringSet 2+| `\https://admin-shell.io/aas/3/1/LangStringSet`
a|
_Array of elements of type langString_


====
Note 1: langString is a RDF data type.
====



====
Note 2: a langString is a string value tagged with a language code.
====


Realization depends on the serialization rules for a technology.

a| Example for the attribute with name "description" of "Referable", i.e. of type "MultiLanguageTextType":
In xml:

[source,xml]
----
<description>
  <langStringTextType>
    <language>en</language>
	<text>This is a multi-language value in English</text>
  </langStringTextType>
  <langStringTextType>
    <language>de</language>
	<text>Das ist ein Multi-Language-Wert in Deutsch</text>
  </langStringTextType>
</description>
----

In rdf:
[source,rdf]
----
[] <https://admin-shell.io/aas/3/1/Referable/description> [
  rdf:type aas:LangStringTextType ;
  <https://admin-shell.io/aas/3/1/AbstractLangString/language> "en"^^xs:string ;
  <https://admin-shell.io/aas/3/1/AbstractLangString/text> "This is a multi-language value in English"^^xs:string ;
] ;
.
----

In JSON :

[source,json,linenums]
----
"description": [
   {
     "language":"en",
     "text": "This is a multi-language value in English."
   },
   {
     "language":"de",
     "text": "Das ist ein Multi-Language-Wert in Deutsch."
   }
]
----
.2+e|[[MessageTopicType]]MessageTopicType 2+| `\https://admin-shell.io/aas/3/1/MessageTopicType`
a|_string_ with max 255 and min 1 characters |

.2+e|[[MultiLanguageNameType]]MultiLanguageNameType 2+| `\https://admin-shell.io/aas/3/1/MultiLanguageNameType`
a| xref:LangStringSet[LangStringSet]

Each langString within the array of strings has a max 128 of and a min of 1 characters (as for NameType).

| See xref:LangStringSet[LangStringSet]

.2+e|[[MultiLanguageTextType]]MultiLanguageTextType 2+| `\https://admin-shell.io/3/1/MultiLanguageTextType`
a| xref:LangStringSet[LangStringSet]

Each string within langString has a max of 1,023 and min of 1 characters.

|See xref:LangStringSet[LangStringSet]

.2+e|[[NameType]]NameType 2+| `\https://admin-shell.io/aas/3/1/NameType`
a|_string_ with max 128 and min 1 characters |"ManufacturerPartId"



.2+e|[[PathType]]PathType 2+| `\https://admin-shell.io/aas/3/1/PathType`
a|

_string_
with max 2048 and min 1 characters

conformant to a URI as per https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#RFC2396[RFC 2396]

====
Note: Values with this restriction are also conformant to the xsd datatype https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#anyURI[anyURI].

"A wide range of internationalized resource identifiers can be specified when an anyURI is called for, and still be understood as URIs per https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#RFC2396[RFC 2396] and its successor(s)."

Source: https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#anyURI[W3C XML Schema Definition Language (XSD) 1.0 Part 2: Datatypes]
====


a|
{blank}./Specification.pdf

file:c:/local/Specification.pdf

\http://www.example.org

FTP://unicode.org


.2+e|[[QualifierType]]QualifierType 2+| `\https://admin-shell.io/aas/3/1/QualifierType`
a|_NameType_ a|
"ExpressionSemantic" (as specified in DIN DKE SPEC 92000:2019-09, see xref:bibliography.adoc#bib16[[16\]])

"life cycle qual" (as specified in IEC 61360-7 - IEC/SC 3D - Common Data Dictionary (link:https://cdd.iec.ch/cdd/common/iec61360-7.nsf/SearchFrameset?OpenFrameSet[CDD - V2.0015.0004])



.2+e|[[RevisionType]]RevisionType 2+| `\https://admin-shell.io/aas/3/1/RevisionType`
a|
_string_ with max 4 and min 1 characters
following the following regular expression:

`^([0-9]\|[1-9][0-9]*)$`

a|
"0"

"7"

"567"

.2+e|[[ValueDataType]]ValueDataType 2+| `\https://admin-shell.io/aas/3/1/ValueDataType`
a|_any xsd atomic type as specified via xref:DataTypeDefXsd[DataTypeDefXsd]_ a|
"This is a string value"

10

1.5

2020-04-01

True


.2+e|[[VersionType]]VersionType 2+| `\https://admin-shell.io/aas/3/1/VersionType`
a|
_string_ with max 4 and min 1 characters

following the following regular expression:

`^([0-9]\|[1-9][0-9]*)$`

a|
"1"

"9999"

|===

== Enumeration for Submodel Element Value Types

Enumerations are primitive data types.
Most of the enumerations are defined in the context of their class.
This clause defines enumerations for submodel element value typesfootnote:[E.g. Property/valueType].

The predefined types used to define the type of values of properties and other values use the names and the semantics of XML Schema Definition (XSD)footnote:[see https://www.w3.org/XML/Schema, https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#built-in-primitive-datatypes].
Additionally, the type "langString" with the semantics as defined in the Resource Description Framework (RDF)footnote:[see: https://www.w3.org/TR/rdf11-concepts/] is used. "langString" is a string value tagged with a language code.

====
Note 1: RDFfootnote:[See https://www.w3.org/TR/rdf11-concepts/#xsd-datatypes] uses XML Schema Built-in data types from Version 1.1 but recommends to use only a subset of xsd data types.
That is why they are excluded from the allowed data types in xref:DataTypeDefXsd[DataTypeDefXsd].


* XSD BuildIn List types are not supported (ENTITIES, IDREFS and NMTOKENS).
* XSD string BuildIn types are not supported (normalizedString, token, language, NCName, ENTITY, ID, IDREF).
* The following XSD primitive types are not supported: NOTATION, QName.
====

====
Note 2: additionally, the following RDF types are not supported in xref:DataTypeDefXsd[DataTypeDefXsd]: HTML and XMLLiteral.
====

====
Note 3: Numeric data types in XML Schema are based on the definitions of IEEE 754 with slight adoptions. For instance, float and double types use different exponent ranges. In any case, solely the XML Schema data type definitions are applicable for AAS values.
====

.DefTypeDefRdf Enumeration
[plantuml, 53-data-type-def-rdf, svg]
....
include::partial$diagrams/53-data-type-def-rdf.puml[]
....

The enumeration is derived from <<image-55-xml-built-in-types>>.

.Data TypeDefXsd Enumeration
[plantuml, 54-data-type-def-xsd, svg]
....
include::partial$diagrams/54-data-type-def-xsd.puml[]
....


<<table-data-types-with-examples>> depicts example values and the value range of the different data types.

The left column "Data Type" shows the data types which can be used for submodel element values.
The data types are defined according to the W3C XML Schema (https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#built-in-datatypes and https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#built-in-derived).
"Value Range" further explains the possible range of data values for this data type.
The right column shows related examples for values of the corresponding data type.

.Data Types with Examples footnote:[See list of RDF-compatible XSD types with short description https://www.w3.org/TR/rdf11-concepts/#xsd-datatypes. Examples from https://openmanufacturingplatform.github.io/sds-bamm-aspect-meta-model/bamm-specification/v1.0.0/datatypes.html]
[[table-data-types-with-examples]]
[cols="15%,22%,24%,39%",options="header",]
|===
| |Data Type |Value Range |Sample Values
|Core types e|xs:string |Character string (but not all Unicode character strings) a|
"Hello world"

"Καλημέρα κόσμε"

"こんにちは世界"


| e|xs:boolean |true, false |true, false
| e|xs:decimal |Arbitrary-precision decimal numbers a|
-1.23

126789672374892739424.543233

+100000.00, 210

| e|xs:integer |Arbitrary-size integer numbers a|
-1

0

126789675432332938792837429837429837429

+100000

|IEEE floating-point numbers e|xs:double |64-bit floating point numbers incl. ±Inf, ±0, NaN a|
-1.0

+0.0

-0.0

234.567e8

-INF

NaN

| e|xs:float |32-bit floating point numbers incl. ±Inf, ±0, NaN a|
-1.0

+0.0

-0.0

234.567e8

-INF

NaN

|Time and dates e|xs:date |Dates (yyyy-mm-dd) with or without time zone a|
"2000-01-01"

"2000-01-01Z"

"2000-01-01+12:05"

| e|xs:time |Times (hh:mm:ss.sss…) with or without time zone a|
"14:23:00"

"14:23:00.527634Z"

"14:23:00+03:00"

| e|xs:dateTime |Date and time with or without time zone a|
"2000-01-01T14:23:00"

"2000-01-01T14:23:00.66372+14:00"footnote:[Corresponds to xs:dateTimeStamp in XML Schema 1.1]

|Recurring and partial dates |xs:gYear |Gregorian calendar year a|
"2000"

"2000+03:00"

| e|xs:gMonth |Gregorian calendar month a|
"--04"

"--04+03:00"

| e|xs:gDay |Gregorian calendar day of the month a|
"---04"

"---04+03:00"

| e|xs:gYearMonth |Gregorian calendar year and month a|
"2000-01"

"2000-01+03:00"

| e|xs:gMonthDay |Gregorian calendar month and day a|
"--01-01"

"--01-01+03:00"

| e|xs:duration |Duration of time a|
"P30D"

"-P1Y2M3DT1H", "PT1H5M0S"

|Limited-range integer numbers |xs:byte |-128…+127 (8 bit) a|
-1, 0

127

| e|xs:short |-32768…+32767 (16 bit) a|
-1, 0

32767

| e|xs:int |2147483648…+2147483647 (32 bit) a|
-1, 0

2147483647

| e|xs:long |-9223372036854775808…+9223372036854775807 (64 bit) a|
-1

0, 9223372036854775807

| e|xs:unsignedByte |0…255 (8 bit) a|
0

1

255

| e|xs:unsignedShort |0…65535 (16 bit) a|
0

1

65535

| e|xs:unsignedInt |0…4294967295 (32 bit) a|
0

1

4294967295

| e|xs:unsignedLong |0…18446744073709551615 (64 bit) a|
0

1

18446744073709551615

| e|xs:positiveInteger |Integer numbers >0 a|
1

7345683746578364857368475638745

| e|xs:nonNegativeInteger |Integer numbers ≥0 a|
0

1

734568374657836485736847563

| e|xs:negativeInteger |Integer numbers <0 a|
-1

-23487263847628376482736487263

| e|xs:nonPositiveInteger |Integer numbers ≤0 a|
-1

0

-938458374985739874987989873

|Encoded binary data e|xs:hexBinary |Hex-encoded binary data a|"6b756d6f77617368657265"

| e|xs:base64Binary |Base64-encoded binary data a|
[listing]
....
SGVsbG8sIFdvcmxkIQ==   
....

|Miscellaneous types e|xs:anyURI |Absolute or relative URIs and IRIs a|
\https://customer.com/demo/aas/1/1/1234859590

"urn:example:company:1.0.0"

| e|rdf:langString |Strings with language tags a|
"Hello"@en

"Hallo"@de


====
Note: this is written in RDF/Turtle syntax, @en and de are the language tags.
====


|===

[.table-with-appendix-table]
[cols="30%h,70%"]
|===
|Enumeration: |[[DataTypeDefXsd]]DataTypeDefXsd
|Explanation: a|
Enumeration listing selected xsd anySimpleTypes of XML Schema 1.0

For more details see https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#built-in-primitive-datatypes

|Set of: |--
h|ID: | `\https://admin-shell.io/aas/3/1/DataTypeDefXsd`

h|Literal h|Explanation
e|xs:anyURI |see: https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#anyURI
e|xs:base64Binary |see: https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#base64Binary
e|xs:boolean |see https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#boolean
e|xs:byte |see https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#byte
e|xs:date |see https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#date
e|xs:dateTime |see https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#dateTime
e|xs:decimal |see https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#decimal
e|xs:double |see https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#double
e|xs:duration |see https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#duration
e|xs:float |see https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#float
e|xs:gDay |see https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#gDay
e|xs:gMonth |see https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#gMonth
e|xs:gMonthDay |see https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#gMonthDay
e|xs:gYear |see https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#gYear
e|xs:gYearMonth |see https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#gYearMonth
e|xs:hexBinary |see https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#hexBinary
e|xs:int |see https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#int
e|xs:integer |see https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#integer
e|xs:long |see https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#long
e|xs:negativeInteger |see https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#negativeInteger
e|xs:nonNegativeInteger |see: https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#nonNegativeInteger
e|xs:nonPositiveInteger |see: https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#nonPositiveInteger
e|xs:positiveInteger |see: https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#positiveInteger
e|xs:short |see: https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#short
e|xs:string |see: https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#string
e|xs:time |see: https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#time
e|xs:unsignedByte |see: https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#unsignedShort
e|xs:unsignedInt |see: https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#unsignedInt
e|xs:unsignedLong |see: https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#unsignedLong
e|xs:unsignedShort |see: https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#unsignedShort
|===

[.table-with-appendix-table]
[cols="30%h,70%"]
|===
h|Enumeration: |[[DataTypeDefRdf]]DataTypeDefRdf
h|Explanation: |Enumeration listing all RDF types
|Set of: |--
h|ID: | `\https://admin-shell.io/aas/3/1/DataTypeDefRdf`

h|Literal h|Explanation
e|rdf:langString |String with a language tag
|===

RDF requires IETF BCP 47footnote:[see https://tools.ietf.org/rfc/bcp/bcp47.txt] language tags.
Simple two-letter language tags for locales like "de" conformant to ISO 639-1 are allowed, as well as language tags plus extension like "de-DE" for country code, dialect, etc. like in "en-US" for English (United States) or "en-GB" for English (United Kingdom).
IETF language tags are referencing ISO 639, ISO 3166 and ISO 15924.

.Built-In Types of XML Schema Definition 1.0 (XSD)footnote:[Source: https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#built-in-primitive-datatypes]

[[image-55-xml-built-in-types]]
image::55-xml-built-in-types.png[]
